.na
.nh
.TH N2ASC 1 "29 January 1994" "Local Command"
.SH NAME
n2asc \- netCDF to ASCII converter
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B n2asc [-f format] [-b batchFile] [-c] [-a] [-n]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B n2asc 
is a program for converting a netCDF file (or subset of) to ASCII.  n2asc
provides a GUI similar to nimbus, where you may choose which variables to
output.  To change the "output" of a variable, just double click on the
variable.  You may also select many and then use CTRL-O to toggle them
all at once.
.PP
By default n2asc uses "%10.3f" as it's formating statement.  The default
may be changed in the command line with the -f option.  See printf(3)
for a description of formats.  Formats may also be set for individual
variables.  At startup, n2asc reads $HOME/nimbus/.n2asc and applies
any formats listed there.
.PP
Format of .n2asc file should be varName=Format:
.PP
.nf
XCVCNTS=%10d
CVCNTS=%10d
AFSSP=%8d
APCAS=%8d
AF300=%8d
A200Y=%8d
A200Y=%8d
A260X=%8d
.f
.PP
Normally n2asc prints a time stamp in the first column (X axis).  The -c
option changes this to a running counter, which can be more useful for
plotting programs.
.PP
n2asc supports batch files.  This is useful if you want to dump many
files with the same setup.  A sample batch file follows:
.PP
.nf
if=/home/local/data/231RF10.cdf
of=junk.asc
ti=09:00:00-09:05:00
var=ADIFR
var=BDIFR
.f
.PP
The -a option tells n2asc to produce an ASCII file following the NASA
Ames Data Exchange Format.
.PP
The -n option tells n2asc to not place colons in the time stamp.  Format
will be HHMMSS instead of HH:MM:SS.
.PP
.SH EXAMPLE:
.PP
To change the default to the style of 2.52932e-01, use:
.PP
7% n2asc -f %14e
.PP
.SH FILES
.PP
$HOME/nimbus/.n2asc
.PP
.SH BUGS
.PP
If you specify format statements that have a length less than that
of the variable name, then the title may not remain lined up with the
data columns.
.SH AUTHOR
Chris Webster, National Center for Atmospheric Research
