.na
.nh
.TH crayblocks 3 "04 May 1999" NCAR "Local Routine"
.SH NAME
crayblocks  - Set the number of blocks for Cray blocked I/O
.SH SYNOPSIS
INTEGER crayblocks
.br
\fIier\fR = crayblocks(\fIsize\fR)
.br
INTEGER  \fIsize\fR
.SH "C EXTENSION"
ier = crayblocks(size)
.br
int    *size;
.SH DESCRIPTION
The 
.B CRAYBLOCKS
routine sets the number of 512 Cray-word blocks for an I/O buffer used
during Cray blocked I/O. This
routine is part of a family of routines which allow you to read and
write Cray files from compute servers other than Cray machines.
.PP
During a 
.B CRAYOPEN
for blocked file I/O, a buffer is dynamically allocated.  This routine,
.B CRAYBLOCKS\fR,
can be used to set the number of 512 Cray-word (4096 byte) blocks for
that buffer.  In general, the larger the buffer, the more efficient the
I/O.  The number of blocks specified by this routine will be in effect until
either the program ends, or another 
.B CRAYBLOCKS 
is executed.
.PP
The 
.B CRAYBLOCKS
routine must be executed prior to a CRAYOPEN 
routine for the buffer to get sized as expected.
.PP
If this routine is not used, then 
.B CRAYOPEN 
will look for an environment variable named "CRAYBLOCKS" and
take its value as the number of blocks to use in the buffer.  If this
environment variable is not defined, then 
.B CRAYOPEN 
will allocate and use a buffer of 1 (one) block.
.PP
This routine has one argument:
.TP 7
.I size
The positive integer number of blocks desired for the buffer(s).  
.SH NOTES
The actual buffer is allocated when a 
.B CRAYOPEN 
routine is executed.   This routine merely sets the number of blocks
which will be allocated.
.SH IMPLEMENTATION
To access this routine, you must include the following loader flags when
building your program:
.sp
.ce
-L /usr/local/lib -lncaru
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.B CRAYBLOCKS
returns -1 (an error!) for values of 
.I size
less than, or equal to 0 (zero).  Otherwise 0 (zero) is returned.
If -1 is returned, then a default size of 1 block will be used in
subsequent 
.B CRAYOPEN
calls.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
crayopen(3), crayrew(3), craywrite(3), crayread(3), crayclose(3),
crayeod(3)
.SH COPYRIGHT
(c) Copyright 1999 University Corporation for Atmospheric Research
.br
All Rights Reserved

