.na
.nh
.TH crayseek 3 "18 June 1999" NCAR "Local Routine"
.SH NAME
crayseek  - Seek to a word offset in an unblocked Cray file.
.SH SYNOPSIS
INTEGER crayseek
.br
\fIier\fR = crayseek(\fIcf\fR, \fIword_off\fR, \fIwhence\fR)
.br
INTEGER  \fIcf\fR
.br
INTEGER  \fIword_off\fR
.br
INTEGER  \fIwhence\fR
.SH "C EXTENSION"
ier = crayblocks(cf, word_off, whence)
.br
int    *cf;
.br
int    *word_off;
.br
int    *whence;
.SH DESCRIPTION
The 
.B CRAYSEEK
routine seeks to a specified word offset in a Cray unblocked dataset.
This routine cannot be used on a Cray blocked file.
.PP
.I cf
is the return from a previously executed crayopen(3).
The 
.I word_off
argument specifies the number of words offset from 
the file's position specified by the 
.I whence.
Specify 
.I whence
as either:
.TP 5
0
From the beginning of the file.
.TP 5
1
From the current file position.
.TP 5
2
From the end of the file.
.SH NOTES
.PP
This routine will not work correctly for files larger than 2 gigabytes.
.SH IMPLEMENTATION
To access this routine, you must include the following loader flags when
building your program:
.sp
.ce
-L /usr/local/lib -lncaru
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.B CRAYSEEK
returns one of the following values:
.TP 5
-1
The underlying lseek(2) failed.
.TP 5
-7
The file is not an unblocked Cray dataset.
.TP 5
-11
The 
.I whence
argument is not 0, 1, or 2.
.TP 5
>=0
The new offset of the file.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
crayopen(3), crayrew(3), craywrite(3), crayread(3), crayclose(3),
crayeod(3)
.SH COPYRIGHT
(c) Copyright 1999 University Corporation for Atmospheric Research
.br
All Rights Reserved

