.na
.nh
.TH ctospi 3 "04 May 1999" NCAR "Local Routine"
.SH NAME
ctospf  -  Cray integer format to IEEE conversion
.SH SYNOPSIS
call ctospi(carray, larray, nwords, ipad)
.sp
real     carray(2*nwords), larray(nwords)
.br
integer  nwords, ipad
.SH DESCRIPTION
The 
.B CTOSPF  
routine converts 64bit Cray integer words to the local 32bit or 64 bit
integers.
.PP
The arguments are:
.TP 8
.B carray
The input array containing the 64bit Cray words.  If you are using this
routine on the IBM RS6000 cluster and had used the "-qautodbl=dblpad"
compiler flag, then this array should have been dimensioned \fInwords\fR
long, otherwise, this array should have been dimensioned \fI2*nwords\fR
long.
.TP 8
.B larray
The output 32bit or 64 bit word array containing the local representation.  
.TP 8
.B nwords
The number of Cray words to convert.
.TP 8
.B ipad
The 
.I ipad 
argument specifies whether zero padding is performed.  Specify 0 (zero)
for no padding, 1 (one) for padding.  Padding is needed only if your
program was compiled using the "-qautodbl=dblpad" compiler option on the
IBM RS6000 cluster.
.SH EXAMPLES
The following converts 100 Cray words:
.sp
.RS 5
PARAMETER (N=100)
.br
REAL      CRAY(2*N),  LOC(n)
.br
(...)
.br
CALL CTOSPF(CRAY, LOC, N)
.br
.RE
.SH NOTES
Any values in the input array that are too large to be represented in
the native format are set to the largest number that can be
represented with the correct sign.  Any values which are too small are
set to 0 (zero).
.PP 
This routine will not work properly on the IBM RS6000 if the 
"-qINTSIZE=8" option is used.
.SH IMPLEMENTATION
This routine is available in the
"ncaru" local library.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
ctospf(3), ctodpf(3), sptocf(3), sptoci(3), dptocf(3), ncaru(3)
.SH COPYRIGHT
(c) Copyright 1999 University Corporation for Atmospheric Research
.br
All Rights Reserved
