.nh
.TH sptoci 3 "04 May 1999" NCAR "Local Routine"
.SH NAME
ctospf  -  Cray integer format to local conversion
.SH SYNOPSIS
call sptoci(larray, carray, nwords, ipad)
.sp
integer  larray(*), carray(*)
.br
integer  nwords, ipad
.SH DESCRIPTION
The 
.B SPTOCI  
routine converts 32bit or 64bit IEEE integer words to Cray 64bit integers.
.PP
The arguments are:
.TP 8
.B larray
The input array containing the integers.  
If you are using this
routine on the IBM RS6000 cluster and had used the "-qautodbl=dblpad"
compiler flag, then this array should have been dimensioned \fInwords\fR
long, otherwise, this array should have been dimensioned \fI2*nwords\fR long.
.TP 8
.B larray
The output Cray 64bit word array containing the converted integers.  
If you are using this
routine on the IBM RS6000 cluster and had used the "-qautodbl=dblpad"
compiler flag, then this array should have been dimensioned \fInwords\fR
long, otherwise, this array should have been dimensioned \fI2*nwords\fR long.
.TP 8
.B nwords
The number of local words to convert.
.TP 8
.B ipad
The 
.I ipad 
argument specifies whether zero padding is performed.  Specify 0 (zero)
for no padding, 1 (one) for padding.  Padding is needed only if your
program was compiled using the "-qautodbl=dblpad" compiler option on the
IBM RS6000 cluster.
.SH EXAMPLES
The following converts 100 Cray words:
.sp
.RS 5
PARAMETER (N=100)
.br
REAL      CRAY(2*N),  LOC(2*N)
.br
(...)
.br
CALL SPTOCI(CRAY, LOC, N)
.br
.RE
.SH IMPLEMENTATION
This routine is available in the "ncaru" local library.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
ctospf(3), ctodpf(3), sptocf(3), sptoci(3), dptocf(3), ncaru(3)
.SH COPYRIGHT
(c) Copyright 1999 University Corporation for Atmospheric Research
.br
All Rights Reserved
