.na
.nh
.TH ncaru 1 "04 May 1999" NCAR "NCAR Local Routine"
.SH NAME
ncaru  - Introduction to library libncaru.a
.SH DESCRIPTION
This section describes the contents of the NCAR local library
libncaru.a.  This library contains a number of Fortran routines you can
use to read and write Cray blocked or unblocked files and perform
numeric conversions from Cray format to IEEE format.  The library also
contains some timing routines as well as the Cray packer routines.
.PP
The ncaru library is not threadsafe.  Ensure that any calls to this
library only ocurr in a single threaded region.
.PP
The following is a alphabetical list of the routines available in this library:
.sp
.nf
\fIName\fP       \fIAppears on Section\fP   \fIDescription\fP

crayback   crayback(3)   Back up a record.
crayblocks crayblocks(3) Set the number of blocks.
crayclose  crayclose(3)  Close a Cray dataset.
crayopen   crayopen(3)   Open or create a Cray dataset.
crayread   crayread(3)   Read from a Cray dataset.
crayrew    crayrew(3)    Rewinds a Cray dataset.
crayweod   crayweod(3)   Write a Cray EOD mark in a Cray dataset.
crayweof   crayweof(3)   Write a EOF mark in a Cray dataset.
craywrite  craywrite(3)  Write data to a Cray dataset.
ctodpf     ctodpf(3)     Converts Cray REAL to DOUBLE PRECISION
ctospf     ctospf(3)     Converts Cray REAL to REAL.
ctospi     ctospi(3)     Converts Cray INTEGER to INTEGER
dptocf     dptocf(3)     Converts DOUBLE PRECISION to Cray REAL.
sptocf     sptocf(3)     Converts 32bit REAL to Cray REAL 
sptoci     sptoci(3)     Converts INTEGER to Cray INTEGER
second     second(3)     Returns the elapsed user CPU time.
wctime	   wctime(3)	 Returns the elapsed wall clock time.
.fi
.SH COPYRIGHT
(c) Copyright 1999 University Corporation for Atmospheric Research
.br
All Rights Reserved
