.na
.nh
.TH ASC2CDF 1 "12 March 1998" "Local Command"
.SH NAME
asc2cdf \- ASCII to netCDF converter
.SH SYNOPSIS
asc2cdf [-d yyyy-mm-dd] [-b time_t] [-g globalAttrFile] [-a] [-i] [-l] [-m] [-r
n] [-s n] [-v] [-h] [-:] ASCII_file netCDF_file
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B asc2cdf 
is program for uploading ASCII data into a netCDF file that follows the
NCAR-RAF/nimbus conventions.  Files that are then useable by ncplot and
the suite of nc* programs at RAF.  With no options, asc2cdf expects the
file to look like something produced by n2asc.  A top row with variable
names, and time in the HH:MM:SS format in the left column.
.PP
The -a option tells asc2cdf that the input file will be following the NASA
Data Exchange Format (Ames).
.PP
The -i option tells asc2cdf that the input file will be following the ICARTT
format.   This is a CSV derivative of Ames DEF.
.PP
The -g option tells netCDF to read a file containing key/value pairs to
be added as global attributes to the netCDF.  e.g.
.br
.nf
Source=NCAR Research Aviation Facility
Address=P.O. Box 3000, Boulder, CO 80307-3000
Phone=(303) 497-1030
Investigator=Teresa Campos
ProjectName=RICO
Platform=N130AR
ProjectNumber=135
FlightNumber=rf18
coordinates=GGLON GGLAT GGALT Time
landmarks=17.1415 -61.7783 ANU,17.6075 -61.82395 SPol
.fi
.PP
The -l option tells asc2cdf that the input file will be following the NASA
Data Exchange Format (Langley).
.PP
The -b option defines a base_time in Unix seconds since January 1st 1970. 
This is useful when trying to merge data back into a netCDF file, where
ncmerge(1) complains about no overlapping time segments.  The default value
is 0.  This option has no affect when the -a or -l option is enabled.
.PP
The -d option lets the user specify a flight date.  This can be used in place
of the -b option.  If both options are specified, the -d will take precedence.
Date must be in ISO-8601 compliant format.
.PP
The -r option defines the data rate.  Values between 0 and 1 are for data which comes
less frequently than once per second (e.g. .1 is 10 second data).  Values greater than
1 are for samples per second (e.g. 50 is for 50Hz data).  The default is 1.
.PP
The -s option tells asc2cdf to skip 'n' lines before getting to the data.
This option is ignored if -a or -l option has been specified.  The default is 1.
.PP
The -m option tells asc2cdf that time in the left column will be in
seconds since midnight format (with rounding).  This is automatically
turned on with the -a or -l option.
.PP
The -v option is for verbose, and outputs some debugging type information.
.PP
The -h option is for histogram, and outputs NASA Ames formatted data that
has all the variable names the same, and a comment line like "CELLSIZES =
1.0f, ...", to be a vector in the netCDF file suitable for plotting with
ncpp. Note that to plot with ncpp, the variable name and units must be
something ncpp recognized and both counts and concentration must be present
in the same file. This option doesn't deal with all that, just turns
columnar histogram data from a nasa Ames file into a single netCDF var.
.PP
The -: option specifies that the left column stamp is in the format HHMMSS instead of HH:MM:SS.
.PP
.SH AUTHOR
Chris Webster, National Center for Atmospheric Research
