.na
.nh
.TH crayclose 3  "04 May 1999" NCAR "Local Routine"
.SH NAME
crayclose  - Close a Cray-Blocked file.
.SH SYNOPSIS
INTEGER CRAYCLOSE
.br
\fIier\fR = \fBCRAYCLOSE\fR(\fIifc\fR)
.br
INTEGER  \fIifc\fR
.SH "C EXTENSION"
.sp
ier = crayclose(ifc)
.br
int    *ifc;
.SH DESCRIPTION
The 
.B CRAYCLOSE
routine closes a Cray-Blocked file.  This routine is part of a family of
routines which allow you to read and write Cray-Blocked file from
compute servers other than the Cray machines.
.PP
If the file was opened for writing, then the internal buffers are
written to the file, a Cray EOF (End Of File) mark and Cray EOD (End Of
Data) mark are written, and the file is closed.
.PP
This routine has one argument:
.TP 6
.I ifc
The integer return from a previously issed crayopen(3).
.SH CAUTIONS
This routine must be called prior to exiting your program.  If your
program terminates without calling 
.B CRAYCLOSE
the Cray-Blocked file will not be formatted properly and will not be
readable on Cray computer.
.SH IMPLEMENTATION
To access this routine, you must include the following loader flags when
building your program:
.sp
.ce
-L /usr/local/lib -lncaru
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.B CRAYCLOSE
returns a non-negative integer upon successful closing of the file,
otherwise -1 is returned to indicate an error of some kind.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
crayopen(3), crayrew(3), craywrite(3), crayread(3), crayweod(3),
crayeod(3)
.SH COPYRIGHT
(c) Copyright 1999 University Corporation for Atmospheric Research
.br
All Rights Reserved

