.na
.nh
.TH crayweod 3  "04 May 1999" NCAR "Local Routine"
.SH NAME
crayweod  - Write a Cray EOD (End Of Data) mark to a Cray-Blocked file.
.SH SYNOPSIS
INTEGER CRAYWEOD
.br
\fIier\fR = CRAYWEOD(\fIifc\fR)
.br
INTEGER  \fIifc\fR
.SH "C EXTENSION"
.sp
ier = crayweod(ifc)
.br
int    *ifc;
.SH DESCRIPTION
The 
.B CRAYWEOD
routine writes a Cray EOD (End Of Data) mark to a Cray-Blocked file. This
routine is part of a family of routines which allow you to read and
write Cray files from compute servers other than Cray machines.
.PP
This routine is only valid if the Cray file was opened for writing.
.PP
If called on a Cray unblocked file, this routine immediately returns
with a error code.  There are no EOD marks in Cray unblocked files.
.PP
This routine has one argument:
.TP 5
.I ifc
The integer return from a previously issed crayopen(3).
.SH CAUTIONS
There can be only one Cray EOD mark in a Cray-Blocked file. The 
.B CRAYCLOSE 
routine automatically adds a Cray EOD mark when closing a file.  It is
highly suggested that you do use this routine; it is only provided for
historical reasons.
.SH IMPLEMENTATION
To access this routine, you must include the following loader flags when
building your program:
.sp
.ce
-L /usr/local/lib -lncaru
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.B CRAYWEOD
returns a non-negative integer upon success,
otherwise -1 is returned to indicate an error of some kind.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
crayopen(3), crayrew(3), craywrite(3), crayread(3), crayclose(3),
crayweod(3)
.SH COPYRIGHT
(c) Copyright 1999 University Corporation for Atmospheric Research
.br
All Rights Reserved

