.na
.nh
.TH crayread 3  "04 May 1999" NCAR "Local Routine"
.SH NAME
crayread  - Read data from a Cray file.
.SH SYNOPSIS
INTEGER CRAYREAD
.br
\fInwds\fR = \fBCRAYREAD\fR(\fIifc, loc, nwords, iconv\fR)
.br
INTEGER    \fIifc\fR
.br
(type)     \fIloc\fR
.br
INTEGER    \fInwords\fR
.br
INTEGER    \fIiconv\fR
.SH "C EXTENSION"
nwds = CrayRead(ifc, loc, nwords, iconv)
.br
int    ifc;
.br
void   *loc;
.br
int    nwords;
.br
int    iconv;
.SH DESCRIPTION
The 
.B CRAYREAD 
routine is used to read data from a Cray-blocked or Cray-unblocked file.  
This routine is
part of a family of routines used to read and write Cray datasets from
compute servers other than the Cray computers.
.PP
This routine can also convert data from a Cray format into a native
format by setting the \fIiconv\fR argument.  This allows you to read 
Cray data and have it automatically converted into the native format
without having to call other numeric conversion routines.  
.PP
Note that for unblocked file reads, the number of Cray words read must
be a multiple of 512-Cray words.  See the description of 
.I nwords
and 
.I iconv
below.
.PP
The arguments to 
.B CRAYREAD
are:
.TP 7
.I ifc
The integer return from a previous crayopen(3).
.TP
.I loc
The array where the data are stored.  The type of this array depends
upon the data being read.  The array type can be INTEGER, REAL,
CHARACTER, or DOUBLE PRECISION.
.TP 7
.I nwords
The integer number of words to read into \fIloc\fR.  See the \fIiconv\fR
description for more information.
.TP 7
.I iconv
An integer specifying the numeric conversion.  If no conversion is
performed (\fIiconv\fR = 0), the \fInwords\fR argument is measured 
in Cray words.  For all other cases \fInwords\fR is measured in
\fIloc\fR words.  
\fIiconv\fR must be one of the following:
.RS 7
.TP 4
0 -
No conversion is performed. In this case the Cray data are returned
exactly as they exist in the file.  Note that if \fIloc\fR points to 4
byte words (32 bits), then \fIloc\fR must be dimensioned 2*\fInwords\fR
long in order to hold all the Cray words.
.TP 4
1 -
Data from the Cray-Blocked file are converted from Cray single precision
floating point format (64 bit) into the local single precision (32 bit)
floating point format.  If the value of the cray word exceeds the 
maximum settable value for the IEEE representation, the IEEE word is 
set to the maximum IEEE value.
.TP 4
2 - 
Data from the Cray-Blocked file are converted from Cray single precision
floating point format (64 bit) into the local double precision (64 bit) floating point
format.  
.TP 4
3 -
Data from the Cray-Blocked file are converted from Cray 
integer format (46 bit) into the local (32 bit) integer 
format.  Overflow values are truncated to 32bits.  NOTE: Cray INTEGER 
values are only 46bits by default.  Use this flag for "normal" Cray 
integer data.
.TP 4
4 - 
This setting is only useful on an IBM RS6000 machine where you have
compiled your program using the "-qautodbl=dblpad" option to the xlf
compiler.  Data from the Cray-Blocked file are converted from Cray 
integer format (64 bit) into the local double padded (64 bit) integer
format.  
.TP 4
5 - 
Data is converted from Cray 64bit integers to IEEE 64bit integers. 
.SH EXAMPLES
Read 100 Cray words with no conversion into the single precision (32bit)
array "X":
.sp
.RS 8
PARAMETER (NWORDS = 100)
.br
REAL  X(2*NWORDS)
.br
(...)
.br
NWDS = CRAYREAD(IFC, X, NWORDS, 0)
.RE
.PP
Read 100 Cray words and convert from Cray floating point format to
single precision floating point format.
.sp
.RS 8
PARAMETER (NWORDS = 100)
.br
REAL  X(NWORDS)
.br
(...)
.br
NWDS = CRAYREAD(IFC, X, NWORDS, 1)
.RE
.SH NOTES
This routine cannot be used to convert Cray double precision (128 bit)
values.
.PP
.B crayread
can only sucessfully convert single-type records.  If you have mixed
type records, first read them into integer arrays with NO 
conversion (ie: iconv == 0) , EQUIVILENCEd appropriately 
with REAL arrays, then call the numeric conversion routines separately.
Pay special attention to the dimensions recalling that a Cray word is 
always 8 bytes long.
.PP
For blocked files,
.B CRAYREAD 
is record oriented.  For any record length requested, 
.B CRAYREAD
is always left positioned at the next record in the file.
You can use this behavior to either skip records (read 1 word) or to
read records of an unknown size by specifying a record length greater than
the length of the actual record.
.SH IMPLEMENTATION
To access this routine, you must include the following loader flags when
building your program:
.sp
.ce
-L /usr/local/lib -lncaru
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.B CRAYREAD
returns the number of Cray words successfully read or:
.TP 10 
-2
Invalid Cray blocked file structure encountered.
.TP 10
-4 
An EOF (end-of-file) was encountered.  A subsequent 
.B CRAYREAD
will return -5 (EOD) if this is the last EOF in the dataset, otherwise, the
first record of the next file will be read.
.TP 10
-5
An EOD (eod-of-data) was encountered.  
.TP 10
-6
An error occurred while reading the disk file.
.TP 10
-7
An error occurred while reading a Cray unblocked file.
.sp 4
.SH "SEE ALSO"
crayopen(3), crayrew(3), craywrite(3), crayclose(3), crayweod(3),
crayeod(3)
.SH COPYRIGHT
(c) Copyright 1999 University Corporation for Atmospheric Research
.br
All Rights Reserved
