.na
.TH cosconvert 1 "04 May 1999" NCAR "Local Command"
.SH NAME
cosconvert - Convert a COS-blocked, single-file dataset 
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cosconvert 
.B -b 
|
.B -c
|
.B -d
|
.B -x
.I files
.SH DESCRIPTION
The 
.B cosconvert 
command performs one of severral different types of reformatting of 
a Cray-blocked single-file dataset.
.PP
Upon exit, each file is overwritten with the converted data.
.SH OPTIONS
.B cosconvert 
supports several different conversions.  One of the following must be
specified on the command line:
.TP 10
.B -b
Cray-blocked binary conversion.  This option specifies that the
Cray-block control words are stripped from the file, leaving only pure
binary data.
.TP 10
.B -c
Cray-blocked character (with BFI) conversion.  This option specifies that
Cray-block control words are stripped from the file, and each output
record is terminated with a newline character.  This option creates a
UNIX text file structure from a Cray-blocked character dataset.
This option also expands BFI codes.  See the NOTES section below.
.TP 10
.B -d
Cray-blocked character (without BFI) conversion.  This option specifies that
Cray-block control words are stripped from the file, and each output
record is terminated with a newline character.  This option creates a
UNIX text file structure from a Cray-blocked character dataset.
This option does not expand BFI codes.  See the NOTES section below.
.TP 10
.B -x
Expand BFI only.  This option creates a Cray-blocked character file with
the BFI codes expanded into blanks.
.SH NOTES
BFI stands for Blank Field Initiation.  The old Cray Operating System
(COS) used BFI by default when a program created a formatted file.  If
the formatted file contained 3 or more sequential blanks, a special 
two-character code replaced the blanks to reduce the size of the file.
.SH EXAMPLES
Convert the single-file, COS-blocked dataset "abc" which
contains binary data, into a pure binary file.
.sp
.ce
cosconvert -b abc
.PP
Convert "d1" and "d2" to text files, and expand any compressed blanks.
.sp
.ce
cosconvert -c d1 d2
.PP
Convert "xxx" to a text file, but don't expand compressed
blanks.  This is rarely needed.
.sp
.ce
cosconvert -d xxx
.PP
Keep "yyy" as a COS-blocked file, but expand any compressed
blanks.  This is rarely needed.
.sp
.ce
cosconvert -x yyy
.SH "SEE ALSO"
cosfile(1), cossplit(1) 
.SH COPYRIGHT
 (c) Copyright 1993 University Corporation for Atmospheric Research
.br
All Rights Reserved

