.na
.nh
.TH craywrite 3  "04 May 1999" NCAR "Local Routine"
.SH NAME
craywrite  - Write data to a Cray file.
.SH SYNOPSIS
INTEGER CRAYWRITE
.br
\fInwds\fR = \fBCRAYWRITE\fR(\fIifc, loc, nwords, iconv\fR)
.br
INTEGER    \fIifc\fR
.br
(type)     \fIloc\fR
.br
INTEGER    \fInwords\fR
.br
INTEGER    \fIiconv\fR
.SH "C EXTENSION"
nwds = CrayWrite(ifc, loc, nwords, iconv)
.br
int     ifc;
.br
void    *loc;
.br
int     nwords;
.br
int     iconv;
.SH DESCRIPTION
The 
.B CRAYWRITE 
routine is used to write data to a Cray-blocked or Cray-unblocked file.  This routine is
part of a family of routines used to read and write Cray datasets from
compute servers other than the Cray computers.
.PP
This routine can also convert data from a native format into a Cray
format by setting the \fIiconv\fR argument.  This allows you to write 
data files in a Cray format without having to call other numeric
conversion routines.
.PP
Note that for unblocked writes, the number of words written must be a
multiple of 512 Cray words.  See the 
.I nwords
and 
.I iconv
description below.
.PP
The arguments to 
.B CRAYWRITE
are:
.TP 7
.I ifc
The integer return from a previous crayopen(3).
.TP
.I loc
The array where the data are stored.  The type of this array depends
upon the data being written.  The array type can be INTEGER, REAL, 
CHARACTER, or 
DOUBLE PRECISION.  The data in this array is unchanged, regardless of
the conversion specified by the \fIiconv\fR argument.
.TP 7
.I nwords
The integer number of words to write from \fIloc\fR.  
.TP 7
.I iconv
An integer specifying the numeric conversion.  
\fIiconv\fR must be one of the following:
.RS 7
.TP 4
0 -
No conversion is performed. In this case the \fInwords\fR argument is
measured in Cray (8-byte) words. 
.TP 4
1 -
Data from \fIloc\fR are converted from single precision (32 bit)
floating point format into the Cray single precision (64 bit)
floating point format.  In this case, \fIloc\fR is dimensioned
\fInwords\fR long.
.TP 4
2 - 
Data from \fIloc\fR are converted from double precision
floating point format (64 bit) into the Cray single precision (64 bit) 
floating point format.  
.TP 4
3 -
Data from \fIloc\fR are converted from the native 
integer format (32 bit) into the Cray (46 bit) integer format.
Note: This is the default INTEGER type on Cray systems.
.TP 4
4 - 
This setting is only useful on an IBM RS6000 machine where you have
compiled your program using the "-qautodbl=dblpad" option to the xlf
compiler.  Data from \fIloc\fR are converted from the double-padded
integer format (64 bit) into the Cray (64 bit) integer format.  
.TP 4
5 - 
Data converted from 64bit integers to Cray 64bit integers.
.SH EXAMPLES
Write 100 words of array "X" with no conversion:
.sp
.RS 8
PARAMETER (NWORDS = 100)
.br
REAL  X(2*NWORDS)
.br
(...)
.br
NWDS = CRAYWRITE(IFC, X, NWORDS, 0)
.RE
.PP
Write 100 words from array "X" and convert from floating point format to
Cray single precision floating point format.
.sp
.RS 8
PARAMETER (NWORDS = 100)
.br
REAL  X(NWORDS)
.br
(...)
.br
NWDS = CRAYWRITE(IFC, X, NWORDS, 1)
.RE
.SH NOTES
You must explicitly close the file using the CRAYCLOSE routine,
otherwise the disk file will be improperly terminated and unusable.
.PP
This routine cannot be used to write Cray double precision (128 bit)
format.
.SH IMPLEMENTATION
To access this routine, you must include the following loader flags when
building your program:
.sp
.ce
-L /usr/local/lib -lncaru
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.B CRAYWRITE
returns the number of Cray words successfully written or:
.TP 10 
0
Invalid conversion flag specified.
.TP 10 
-2
Invalid Cray blocked file structure encountered.
.TP 10
-6
An error occurred while writing the disk file.
.TP 10
-7
An error occurred while writing a Cray unblocked file.
.TP 10
-12
malloc(3) failed to obtain memory for the conversion buffer.
.sp 4
.SH "SEE ALSO"
crayopen(3), crayrew(3), crayread(3), crayclose(3), crayweod(3), crayeod(3)
.SH COPYRIGHT
(c) Copyright 1999 University Corporation for Atmospheric Research
.br
All Rights Reserved
