

                    Software License Agreement	
                    for Linux Driver Interfaces

This document is a legal agreement between you, the end user
(LICENSEE), and Ballard Technology, Inc.  (BALLARD) for the BALLARD
software product identified above (SOFTWARE), which includes associated
media, printed materials, and any online or electronic documentation. 
By installing, copying, or otherwise using the SOFTWARE you are
agreeing to become bound by the terms of this agreement, which includes
the software license, the Safety Warning, and the version of BALLARD's
Limited Warranty (AD195, unless otherwise mutually agreed by written
contract) in effect when the product was obtained from BALLARD (e.g.,
at the time of purchase).

If you do not agree to the terms of this agreement, promptly return the
product to BALLARD.  The amount you paid for an unused product will be
refunded.

The term "Source file" shall mean any human-readable files (e.g., with
extension .c or .h), and the term "Object files" shall apply to any
compiled files (e.g., with extension .o or .so).  The term "SOFTWARE"
shall apply both individually and collectively to Source and Object
files provided by BALLARD.

OWNERSHIP OF THE SOFTWARE: The SOFTWARE and accompanying documentation
are owned by BALLARD (or its third party suppliers) and are protected
by United States copyright laws.  BALLARD (or its third party
suppliers) owns all copyright, trade secret, and other proprietary
rights in the SOFTWARE.  This license confers no title or ownership in
the SOFTWARE and is not a sale of any rights in the SOFTWARE.

LICENSE GRANT: BALLARD grants the LICENSEE a non-exclusive license to
Use the SOFTWARE as prescribed below.  The term "Use" shall mean
installing, loading, executing, copying, or otherwise using the
SOFTWARE.  Applications developed using the SOFTWARE and incorporating
any part of the Source or Object code from the SOFTWARE are considered
Use of the SOFTWARE.  LICENSEE agrees to Use the SOFTWARE only in
conjunction with or the development of an application for the
associated BALLARD hardware product.

	SINGLE SYSTEM LICENSE: BALLARD grants the LICENSEE a license to Use
	the SOFTWARE on one computer at a time.  In addition, the LICENSEE
	may Use the SOFTWARE to develop custom software applications and
	may freely redistribute the Object files with the custom
	application.

	DEVELOPER SITE LICENSE: BALLARD grants the LICENSEE a license to
	Use the SOFTWARE at a single site on not more than a specified
	number of computers at a time.  Unless otherwise agreed in writing,
	a single site shall mean a single building or group of connected
	buildings sharing a common postal address, and the specified number
	of computers shall be ten (10).  In addition, the LICENSEE may Use
	the SOFTWARE to develop custom software applications and may freely
	redistribute the Object files with the custom application.

REDISTRIBUTION: LICENSEE agrees (a) to distribute only the Object
files; (b) to only distribute the Object files in conjunction with a
custom application for a BALLARD hardware product; (c) to include with
the distributed SOFTWARE (i) a valid copyright notice, and (ii) a
notice restricting the Use and redistribution of the SOFTWARE to Use
and redistribution with the LICENSEE's custom application; (d) to
indemnify, hold harmless, and defend BALLARD and its suppliers from and
against any claims or lawsuits, including attorneys' fees, that arise
or result from the Use or distribution of LICENSEE's software
application; and (e) to assure that any export of the SOFTWARE and the
associated BALLARD hardware and LICENSEE's custom application is not in
violation of any applicable U.S.  regulation or statute.

LIMITATIONS: LICENSEE may not reverse engineer, decompile, or
disassemble the SOFTWARE.  LICENSEE agrees to only Use the SOFTWARE in
conjunction with a BALLARD hardware product.

COPIES: LICENSEE may make copies of the SOFTWARE as required for
archival or back-up purposes.  The LICENSEE shall furnish such copies
with proprietary marks and symbols identical to those affixed to the
SOFTWARE.  All archival and back-up copies of the SOFTWARE are subject
to the provisions of this Agreement.

SAFETY WARNING: BALLARD products are of commercial grade and therefore
are neither designed, manufactured, nor tested to standards required
for use in critical applications where a failure or deficiency of the
product may lead to injury, death, or damage to property.  Without
prior, specific approval in writing by the president of Ballard
Technology, Inc., BALLARD products are not authorized for use in such
critical applications.

U.S.  GOVERNMENT RESTRICTED RIGHTS: The SOFTWARE and documentation are
provided with restricted rights.  Use, duplication, or disclosure by
the Government is subject to restrictions as set forth in subparagraph
(c)(1)(ii) of the Rights in Technical Data and Computer Software clause
at DFARS 252.227-7013 or subparagraphs (c)(1) and (2) of the Commercial
Computer Software-Restricted Rights at 48 CFR 52.227-19, as applicable. 
Manufacturer is Ballard Technology, Inc., 3229A Pine Street, Everett,
WA, 98201.

CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION: All information, whether in printable or
computer readable form, marked as confidential or proprietary to
BALLARD (e.g., BALLARD TECHNOLOGY CONFIDENTIAL) is excluded from this
license and may only be used as authorized by BALLARD in a separate
written document.

TERMINATION: Without prejudice to any other rights, BALLARD may
terminate this Agreement if LICENSEE fails to comply with the terms and
conditions set forth herein.  In such event, LICENSEE agrees to destroy
all copies of the SOFTWARE and all its component parts.

MISCELLANEOUS: This agreement is governed by the laws of the State of
Washington.



Ballard Technology, Inc. 
www.ballardtech.com
support@ballardtech.com


Document Ref: AD186-20080107
Date: January 7, 2008
