.na
.nh
.TH NCAV 1 "08 Januaary 1998" "Local Command"
.SH NAME
ncav \- netCDF average utility
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ncav [-r AveRate] [-m threshhold] [-b batchFile]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ncav 
is a program for averageing netCDF data to less than 1 sample per second.
.B AveRate
may be any integer value greater than 1, representing the number if
seconds to reduce to.  ncav provides a GUI similar to nimbus, where you may
choose which variables to output.  To change the "output" of a variable,
just double click on the variable.  You may also select many and then use
CTRL-O to toggle them all at once.
.PP
By default ncav uses 10 as its AverageRate.  The default
may be changed on the command line with the -r option.  
.PP
ncav does not include "missing_value" in the averages.  A "missing_value"
can be placed in the file, if a certain percentage of values to be
averaged are "missing_value".  The -m option allows you to specify the
maximum percentage of missing_values to be accepted in a given averaging
period.  The default value is 100%.
.PP
ncav supports batch files.  This is useful if you want to dump many files
with the same setup.  A sample batch file follows (note all variables will
be averaged, if no "var=" statements are found in the batchfile):
.PP
.nf
if=/home/data/231RF10.cdf
of=junk.asc
ti=09:00:00-09:05:00
.f
.PP
.SH EXAMPLE:
.PP
To change the default rate to 5 second averages, and specify that any sample
period with more than 80% "missing_value"s for any variable, be replaced
with "missing_value":
.PP
1024% ncav -r 5 -t 80
.PP
.SH BUGS:
.PP
ncav doesn't do minute roll-overs gracefully (e.g. if you run n2asc
after ncav, the time stamp printed during a roll-over can be wrong).  Make
sure to choose an averaging rate that divides into 60 seconds evenly, and
make sure your start time starts on the beginning of a minute (e.g. 23:07:00).
.PP
.SH AUTHOR
Chris Webster, National Center for Atmospheric Research
